I'll start with my opinion. I have been dancing for almost five years and I have been popping for three years. I started out bboying but moved on to popping after I saw the musicality and the pure groove in popping. I live in the US, but my first teachers were from Taiwan and Korea. I have learned both in the United States (workshops from Dsoul, local jams/workshops, etc) as well as intensive training in Korea (Real Marvelous Studio: Hozin, Jaygee, Dokyun, Hyosub, etc). I am very much into the international popping scene and of course, youtube as well as other media sites which are a great place to observe and vibe with in its own respect.

I want to state the observations that I have made, again, I would love to hear disagreements and other opinions, as I know there are so many aspects of the scene that I am unfamiliar with.

To start off, I will start with the two scenes I am fairly familiar with: In Asia(namely Korea) as well as the United States. One of the main differences, and I think many can agree, is the amount of time that the Asian countries spend practicing technique. Speaking from first hand experience, I can vouch for the hours and hours that the Korean dancers spend on foundation and technique alone. Where I practiced in Korea (Real Marvelous Studio- I highly recommend), classes would begin in the afternoon around 3-4pm and the studio would officially close around 4am in the morning, with many dancers including myself staying for hours and hours at a time ("midnight classes" were very common). Regular instructors included Hozin, Dokyun, Jaygee, Hyosub, Juwon, and Trigger with occasional guest teachers such as Boogaloo Kin, and non poppers such as WIZZARD the waacker. When they were not teaching, the instructors would just turn on music and everyone(including the instructors) just practiced and danced rigorously all together. This was just my own experience, and other areas in Asia such as Japan and Taiwan I believe, train similarly to this.

This insane amount of dancing, practicing, and drilling leads to an impeccable and highly advanced foundation which in my opinion, is unmatched anywhere else in the world. The sheer amount of work that many of the asian dancers put in leads to incredible foundation and flawless execution. This usually means perfect foundation (walk outs, twistoflex, masterflex, fresno, etc) as mentioned and some of the hardest and cleanest hitting you will see anywhere in the world. However, compared to the United States (again in my opinion), much of the creativity and originality in the dance is lost. What I mean by this is that many of the dancers look similar, all incredibly good, but similar. The willingness to push the boundaries outside of the technique and foundation is less focused on than the technique itself. This is why many of the big asian names (Hoan, Gucchon, Kei, Poppin J, etc) are so famous because they combine their strong foundation and technique with creative elements.

In contrast, the poppers in the United States, by my observation, are much more focused on the creativity and originality in concepts than the Asian scenes. The high creativity and the exploration of dance is very prominent in the United States. In sessions and practices in the USA, more emphasis is put on freestyle, and dance rather than foundation and technique. For example, much more use in concepts, animation, waves, and tutting is showcased in jams and cyphers in the USA than in asia. However, I feel there is a lacking in focus for basic foundation and technique for a popper from the states vs. in asia. However, every famous popper from the states (Jr Boogaloo, Slim Boogie, Boogie Frantick, Rashaad, Poppin Pete, etc) all have insane creativity/originality coupled with very strong foundation.

I want to point out that I am not judging the differences, just pointing them out, I feel the differences add to the culture and that we can learn from both sides.

However, comparing the average dancer, an American popper will focus much less on technique than a Korean Popper and more on his concepts and creativity.

From what I have observed, and studied, my conclusion is that a balance must be achieved. A strong foundation and technique is important to maturing your dance and having mastery over your technique, but creativity and original expression is just as important to express your true self in your dance. Each enhances the other and both must be practiced. A good popper no matter where they are from combine both technique and freedom in expression which makes their dancing truly exquisite.

Again, there is so much more to talk about I feel, such as the way jams are set up, battling techniques, belief in dance, etc as well as so many other countries I have not talked about. This post is already long af, but asia (mainly korea but I plan to go to many other asian countries to study) and the United States scenes are where my knowledge and experience is best. I will continue posting on this thread and I encourage others to do the same as there is so much knowledge to be shared in the dance. Peace.